docs: First cut draft of revised Tutorial - Relations, Filtering, Aggregation (#3088)
PrQL/prql: web/book/src/tutorial/aggregation.md

# Aggregation

A key feature of analytics is reducing many values down to some summary. This

> act is called "aggregation" and always includes a function &mdash; for

Reviewer: Can we just use a dash in markdown?

```suggestion
act is called "aggregation" and always includes a function — for
```

Author: I don't think Markdown will emit an em dash (which is typographically more correct) for a bare "-" in the source. I'm OK either way - we can add the decision to our style guide. Let's leave &mdash; there as a reminder

Reviewer: FYI on Mac this is just `alt+shift+-`: —

example, `average` or `sum` &mdash; that reduces the table to a single row.

> **aggregate:** The `aggregate` transform takes a tuple to create one or many new columns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**aggregate:** The `aggregate` transform takes a tuple to create one or more new columns
```

> **aggregate:** The `aggregate` transform takes a tuple to create one or many new columns

Reviewer: Could we replace these inline emphases with more minor headings? Or you like the current style?

Author: I went back and forth. I'll switch all to a minor heading to see how they look

that "distill down" data from all the rows.

```
from invoices

> aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum total }

Reviewer: Much better!

> aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum total }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum amount }
```

using `total` is not the clearest name for the thing being summed...

Reviewer 2: `total` is a column in `chinook/invoices`

Before the tutorial merges, I'd like to have actual tables with chinook data in the book, which would add a lot to understanding of PRQL.

Author: @aljazerzen is correct - the `invoices` table has a `total` column. Not my favorite name, either, but I wanted the examples to work in the playground.

```
In the example above, the `total` column of all rows of the `invoices` table
is summed to produce a single value.

`aggregate` can produce multiple summaries at once when
one or more aggregation expressions are contained in a tuple.
`aggregate` discards all columns that are not present in the tuple.

```
from invoices
aggregate {
    num_orders = count this,
    sum_of_orders = sum total,
}
```

In the example above, the result is a single row with two columns.
The `count` function displays the number of rows in the table that was passed in;
the `sum` function adds up the values of the `total` column of all rows.

## Grouping

Suppose we want to produce summaries of invoices _for each city_
in the table.

> `aggregate` cannot do this because it will always produce a single row.

Reviewer: This could be rephrased away from the negative (particularly since it's not exactly correct — it can do it — it just requires a `group`

Author: I agree. I'll rephrase as "We could have a series of aggregates - one for each city..."

We could separate the relation into groups corresponding to individual
cities, and apply `aggregate` to each one of them:

```
from albums
filter billing_city == "Oslo"
aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum total }
```

```
from albums
filter billing_city == "Frankfurt"
aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum total }
```

```
from albums
filter billing_city == "London"
aggregate { sum_of_orders = sum total }
```

> ... and so on. Of course this is repetitive (and boring) and error prone (because we would need to type each `billing_city` by hand). Moreover, we would need to create the `billing_city` list before we started.

Reviewer: Not a verdict — feel free to ignore — but I think this is very laborious given the average reader — they probably know about group-by from SQL, or at least the concept of a pivot table in Excel.

So I would skip this explanation and just jump into the concept of grouping...

Author: For newcomers, I think it's important to motivate the notion of grouping. (The experts will only be reading the Tutorial to see if they're smarter than we are :-) 

That said, I can trim it down to one example PRQL query and then describe London and Oslo, etc.

**group:** The `group` transform separates the table into groups (say, those having the same city)
using information that's already in the table.
It then applies a transform to each group, and combines the results back together:

```
from invoices
group billing_city (
    aggregate {
        num_orders = count this,
        sum_of_orders = sum total,
    }
)
```

> People who know how this is done in SQL will probably have noticed that we just
> decoupled aggregation from grouping. These two very connected operations (in SQL) benefit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those familiar with SQL have probably noticed that we just
decoupled aggregation from grouping. These connected operations (in SQL) benefit
```

(brevity)

> immensely from each being a standalone function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from each being a standalone function.
```

("show, don't tell")

Firstly, each can have invariants that the query engine can
leverage to produce more efficient queries.
Additionally, they can be used with other transform functions, such as:

```
from invoices
group billing_city (
    take 2
)
```

> This code collects the first two rows for each city's `group`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code collects the first two rows for each `billing_city`.
```

Is that still right?

Author: I think so - that's how it looks in the Playground

Reviewer: Sorry, my comment was unclear. I just meant: we can "for each city" rather than "for each city's group"

The SQL needed to replicate this behavior might include window functions and
sub-queries. PRQL handles all the complexity.
Some dialects (PostgreSQL, DuckDB, Google BigQuery) have a special
syntax to improve performance and reduce the query complexity
(for example ,`DISTINCT ON` if the query uses `take 1`).

> But it's not a general solution for the case of `take 2`.

Reviewer: I think this is great but probably belongs in the reference — I liked the guide that @aljazerzen originally posted (which I now can't find...) about the relative uses of each type of guide

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/db9ba055721c39dcc73e050736ccfbd9ad718f0e/web/book/src/overview.md

Author: Yes, a lot of the side notes may not belong in the Tutorial.  We can evolve their location as we iterate on this.
